
			Final Exam (both sections):
			Tue, Dec 05 2017
			7:10 P.M. - 10:00 P.M.
			Graphic Arts 026 -0106

All material is subject to conceptual questions and to application questions.
Some topics are marked "Conceptual Only" and are therefore not subject to
application questions.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------


We have discussed the following material in your textbook:

   Overview of DBMS/databases --Chapter 1, up to and including 1.2
      know the components and their purpose

   Basics of the Relational Model -- Chapter 2, up to and including 2.3
      (but skipping 2.1.4, 2.1.5, & 2.1.6)

   The Relational Algebra: section 2.4
      know all of the operators and how to use them
      write a relational algebra expression for problem
      give the operator tree for your expression
      what will your expression produce
      given an expression and a database, what is produced?

   SQL DML: 6.0-6.2.5; 6.4-6.4.1; 6.4.3-6.4.7; 6.5
      SELECT-FROM-WHERE-GROUP BY-HAVING-ORDER BY <for absolute sure>
      (up to and including aggregation)

      INSERT INTO 
      DELETE FROM 
      UPDATE

      NULL values in the WHERE clause

      -> I WILL NOT expect you to know arcane DATE/TIME functions.

   Entity Relationship: 4.1; 4.3.1-4.3.3; 4.4 (but notation varies a bit)
      know the notation used in class: given a diagram, answer questions as
         point out an identifying relationship;
         point out a weak entity type;
         which entity set of this relationship may be related to more than 
            one entity;

      conceptual questions may be asked e.g.,
       - What does total participation in a relationship mean?
       - Why can't we have a multi-valued attribute in a table with its entity?
       - Given an English description and a partial diagram, should certain
	 information be an attribute or another entity?

      -> I WILL NOT give you an English description of data and ask you
         to come up with a diagram.
      -> I MAY give you a diagram and ask you to come up with a set
         of relations.
      -> I MAY give you a diagram and ask you questions about it

   Nested Queries (Subqueries) section 6.3
	 You will MOST CERTAINLY need to write subqueries (unless you can
	 find a way around it).

   Alternative Join Syntax section 6.3.6
      -> You may use any JOIN syntax you wish to use.
      -> I may ask conceptual questions, so don't feel that you can just
	 skip this.

   Outer Joins -- section 5.2.7; 6.3.8
	 You might need to write a relational algebra query with outer join
	 You might need to write a SQL query with outer join

   JDBC -- section 9.6 conceptual questions
	 I could perhaps ask you to prepare a query for execution.
	 But I don't see asking you to write Java code on the exam.
	 

   Database Views -- section 8.1 conceptual only

   SQL Injection -- not in your text; conceptual/short answer only
      Given a snippet of application code,
      -> be able to tell me what a SQL query would look like for different
	 inputs from a user with nefarious intent
      -> be able to decide if a string input would be effective for
	 nefarious purposes
      -> be able to explain the purpose served by different parts of an input
	 string
      -> be able to tell me what would happen if the SQL login statement
	 were different from what was given in class
      -> know strategies to prevent SQL Injection

   Transactions -- section 6.6 (except 6.6.7)

      I remind you that the 'I' in the ACID properties of transactions is
      ISOLATION, and that it means that a transaction is executed apparently
      as though it is running in the database in isolation, that is, as
      though it is the only transaction running. Thus, no transaction should
      ever be able to read intermediate results from another transaction.

      See the box on page 305 for a brief discussion of transactions running
      at different Isolaton levels.

   Remember the principle of Orthogonality -- if an object of type X can
   be used somewhere, ANY object of type X 

   We will use heroDogs again, but I will modify the data so it's more
   interesting. (For example, the Labrador Retriever has been the #1 dog
   breed for 26 years. So questions such as "List the breeds that have
   been #1 and how many times they have been #1 in the past 26 years and
   order them by the number of times they have been #1" and have the data
   make it interesting. Yeah, the schema is really all you need, but I
   want to have interesting data too.
